The courses, like statistics, were important
because it's the foundation on which what we call
forest maturation is
built. And soils and economics,
plant physiology, Those sorts of things were key,
and those were courses that were taken outside the
department. But you end up in forestry having
about four or five what we call core courses. One of
them is, well, ecology would be another external
course. But if you have about four or five core
courses, then that includes silviculture,
mensuration, management,
whatever you call your wood technology course,
and forest economics. If you had all of the faculty
members from those years, both in required
courses in the department and outside the
department, and they were all lined up, which ones
would you want to thank most? Well, there
were two people that were here when I came. Bob
Rhodes, who was a... totally devoted person to
students. I mean, there was a stream of students
coming in his office all the time. And he served a
valuable role because he taught dendrology and
those kind of courses, ecology and those kind of
courses. But certainly, he played a major role.
Dave Mooring. would be
the other one that I would identify. He just spent
an inordinate amount of time carried a heavy
research load, but spent an inordinate amount of
time with students. And he'd haul those kids to
East Texas, you know, all for, you know, come back
in the middle of the night and this sort of thing.
And I was really devoted to him. In fact, When he
left us with the Mississippi State in a few years,
he was on their school forest
and had
a heart attack. Were there some people teaching
courses outside the department that did an
excellent job? Yeah, your chemistry, biology,
economics.
All right, what about the advising and the
counseling? Who are the people that
undergraduates in forest science would turn to?
Well, Roach. What about at the college level?
I guess Dick Pops was over
there one day. But that's who they talked to. Do you
have any good student anecdotes to share? Serious
or not so serious as far as science and student
stories? Well, a lot of those sort of things come
out of either field trips or our summer camp. We
have a summer program where we take them to East
Texas
for a period of weeks and keep them there. and do a
lot of the field work that is related to the theory
that they get in their courses over here. And they
live,
we've had them over at Huntsville at San Houston
Dorm. We've had them out on the San Houston
National Forest I think it was an old job course
center. And right now, they share the East Texas
Conservation Center that Stephen F. Austin owns
over on Lake Sam Rayburn. But anyway, they live in
an outdoor, fairly rudimentary situation. And
those are always... fertile ground for problems
and interesting stories. I do recall one time when
one of our, when we were finishing up the summer
camp, it was the last day and we had a big and
so
on down in front of the lakes on
St. Houston National Forest. And there was a fair
amount of beer drinking going on, and everybody
got thrown in the lake, including all the faculty.
And after we got through this, one of the students
said, I lost my ID risk. And so we, it was pitch dark
then. We kind of looked around a little bit and
couldn't find it. And the next day, he came out
there. He and some others came out and started
looking around the edge of the lake there. And
then...
was sitting there in about six inches of water, I
guess, at least enough to where it was clearly
visible. And you talk about one happy son.
He was really pleased. Another Aggie Ring story.
We had, A&M had a big contract which
you probably
remember with the Dominican Republic. And it
involved several things, but one of them was to
bring students up here and give them degrees. We
had, I don't know, four or five Dominican students
in forestry. And they did okay and got out. and went
back to the Dominican. And Owens, Illinois had an
operation down there in the Dominican. And one of
them went to work for Owens, Illinois. And anyway,
somewhere in the woods of the Dominican, he lost
his baggy ring. So the vice president for Owens,
Illinois,
operation, called me up one day and says, how do you
get an Aggie ring? I said, well, it takes about four
years. He said, no. He said, then he told me the
story. I can't think of his kid's name
now. I think he had something like that. he's a lot
Did you feel
that you all were given, compared to the other
departments in agriculture, were you all given
equitable treatment? Well, you'll never get a
department head
to admit that. That's what I thought. Whose budget
do you wish you could have had, and which
departments? Well,
just let me name the department heads. And then
you, O.D. Butler,
Perry Atkinson, entomology, Ty Timm, ag
economics. Those guys always seem to do well. The
other one that did well was was Morris Bloodworth.
He was . I'd say those four probably prospered
during my period as department head. Then when I
went over to the experiment station, and Neville
Clark showed up over there, and we started looking
at the books, we found out why.
They basically put together two budgets.
I don't know that Ty Pinn was, I think Ty was already
out of the picture by then, but anyway. But
certainly Perry and O.D. and Morris. And then
Jarvis
would, you know, pay the budgets, they'd go
through the board and the whole bit. They'd come
back over and out. Jarvis, here's our real budget.
So I
found out that all department heads were not
created equal. During those days, you, as
department head, you were not the chairman. You
were the head. Did you all,
in those days, in that department, were salaries
and promotions on a percentage basis, or were they
all on a merit basis?
Well, they were all on a, for the most part, unless
we got told that everybody gets 3% or 5% or
whatever, they were on a merit basis. But in those
days also, you will recall that the department
head was lowered. Faculty governments
didn't exist. So whatever I felt like those guys
deserved, promotions were a bit different
because that was another more
and
then you have
to go defend them without mentioning any
significant pain do you remember during that
period any situation where you lost somebody
because Another
school just outbid them and took somebody away
that you wanted to keep. I'd say Goldstein, and
more in chief probably, but they offered
Goldstein as the head of the big department of NC
State, so that was a bit of a different deal. Others
that we lost of that early group,
I don't recall. And we made some counteroffers
in the United States. You mentioned faculty
government and so forth. Based on your experience
of more than three decades, if you were the
dictator and didn't have to explain it to any
committee or any voters, What role would you have
the faculty play in a department today that wants
to make real progress in terms of what role would
the faculty play in salary increases and so forth
and evaluation of the capability of faculty? I
think the faculty. principle and probably the
most important role is in the promotion
and tenure process. I think that's clear that
their involvement
there is important to maintaining standards and
this sort of thing. I'm not convinced that
resource allocation is something that they do
very well. There's always a greed factor there
that creeps into almost anything you do like that.
Most recently, when I was interim department head
for about 18 months over there, we had some funds
that were centrally held and could be allocated
for graduate programs, for teaching equipment.
Previous department head had a committee of
faculty to do that,
and I thought that was fine. I thought that was the
best way. There wasn't a whole lot of money
involved, but it was still fun. But routine
resource allocation, take input wherever you can
get it, But there is a process that we have that
is probably not practiced as religiously as it
should be,
and that's performance appraisal. And if you do a
good
job of performance
appraisal, and the faculty are responsive to
that, I mean, they commit themselves to
that, then I think you get a pretty good reading on
it. And it doesn't take a rocket scientist to
figure out who the, achievers are and who are not.
Of course, you run into
a problem
where you have a high achiever who's a son of a
bitch. And that's just a very frustrating thing to
deal with. But there are those people who are that
way. And in a few instances, you have somebody who
is extremely convenient, extremely pleasant,
always glad-handed, but not very productive
enough. And then one of my frustrations with some
faculty committees is that they don't assume
enough responsibility for the results of their
decisions. for example, a search committee that
hires some key person, they then walk away. Right.
And somebody else is responsible to leave with the
consequences of that force. All right. So let's
make believe there are 40 to 50 forestry programs.
And 30 years ago, A&M was a beginner. in that 40-50,
just getting started. At the time you moved away
from the department headship, where would you
have placed A&M in that 40-50, in the top or bottom,
divided into some kind of percentiles? Oh, I would
say we were around the middle of somewhere. We went
up, though, in a few years and probably peaked when
Charles Lee was head of the department. He was a
very
good department. We recruited him from
Mississippi State. Did he follow you? Well, no,
there was a guy between us who was a loser, and so we
lost the road. Where did Lee come from? He came in
the early 80s. I left in 77, and then we had
this guy in Penn State that came for about three or
four years, and he just didn't work out. But when
Charlie came, that department flourished. And he
probably stayed there until, oh, 1988 or 89,
somewhere along in there. And during that period
of time, the department was probably in the top
25%.
No,
they've lost Graham. And again, there's been
a lot of slippage in keeping the department head
position moving. You get a guy in there that the
administration doesn't feel good about, and the
department starts to slip, and he senses that, and
faculty begins to sense, and then finally they
decide to do something about it. Well, you know,
that's several years,
and then there's
a long, you know, go find somebody else. There's a
good department head in there now. He's
kind of new to
the game, but he's going to be super. And I see the
department coming back. In a theoretically
perfect arrangement, would a department head be
hired with a specific term, four-year,
five-year, renewable? Well, I think that's the
case now. They get a two-year review from there,
and then a four-year
review that's more comprehensive, and then
another four-year review.
Most of the department heads in agriculture tend
to make careers out of being department heads.
That's not quite so much the case now as it was 20
years ago. But look at OD and so on. So the review
process is important. But more important than
that is some sort of timely action. timely
action if there's a problem. Because the
department can slip so bad. I've wondered also,
what is your opinion about this? Most
departments, when they lose through retirement,
death, or going somewhere else, the top-notch
senior person tend to fill that with a junior
person, a beginner. Is that good to do that
normally? Does that keep the prestige of the
department high? Or should they try on occasion to
hire a top-notch senior person? Well, I think it's
certainly, from the department perspective,
it's good to go get if that's an area that you want to
continue to emphasize to get a good person and a
senior person in that position. But what's
happening now is you get so much salary erosion
that you can't afford to go higher. a
good person
because you know what it takes to go out on the
market these days and try to hire somebody, a
senior person. And most departments can't afford
to do that. I've talked to the way the big, old,
high-level schools, the old projects, they've
got million-dollar positions
institution
in that specialty. And
we,
as public schools,
don't do that as well. But because of, and again,
you mentioned the funding issue. I found in some
cases, the faculty in the department thinks, oh,
if this person who left is making a big salary, if we
fill it with a person with a mighty salary, we'll
get to keep that difference. So we told them, no.
All
right. You go over to the experiment station after
eight years. What attracted you there? Well, it
was kind of a false attraction.
The department heads in brain science and
wildlife and fisheries and recreation and parks
and forestry had been plotting since I came to form
a school of that
nature. And there's precedent for that all over
the West.
And so we had made a proposal to do that. And Jack
Williams, when it got to his desk, says,
coordinating board's not entertaining any new
organizational units at this time. Let's run this
up a flagpole. So John Calhoun sent a letter back to
Harry and said, in fact Jack said, why don't you do
something we can do internally? to identify this
group of departments the way they want the
identity. And so the idea was to form an institute
of renewable natural resources. That's what we
did. And then I was going to go over and be the
director of it. Well, about the time I headed over
there, Jarvis
moved to the president's
office. Neville Carr came in as director of the
Experiment Station. And I literally got
submerged in the Experiment Station business.
And was never really able to lift
the Institute out of the organizational mire. And
that's been going on ever since. And that's still a
topic of discussion. I saw it on the agenda of a
meeting that we had here in the Ag Program
Conference a couple of weeks ago. And Bob Brown,
who's head of Wildlife and Fisheries now, was sort
of a daddy rabbit to try to do something about that.
So
that's the reason I went over there, but it never
materialized.
Right. And your title when you go to the
conversation was what? Associate Director.
Associate Director. And you served in the
Associate Director of? For about...
Describe
your duties. Well,
I primarily, I had
some budget
responsibilities. Facilities were almost all
mine. Programatically, Neville and I sort of We
did that together
with the part of the agency that served him. The
building behind him, he stayed on the road for a
great deal. He was very active in that way.
and
built in behind
him
. But budget and facilities and programs, I guess,
were my primary activities. During those 11
years, give some examples of some of the big
decisions you remember.
Well,
I think probably the most significant thing that
we did was make a major run at the legislature in
for a substantial amount of money across probably
six or eight different programs. One of them was
called Biotechnology
Factory. And we were successful, almost totally
successful. And with that, those resources, and
that was about the last year we had with the
legislature, because you remember in 85, oil had
gone south. And it was, you know, Mark White was
whacking at us and so it was pretty tough sledding
going on. So we got in on the last good year. But that
money was put together in a central pool and used as
a competitive grants program for people in the
extermination station to start building
programs in six or eight areas that we had
identified. And certainly where we are now with
molecular biology is largely due to that state
investment. that was made, which was about $2
million in the biotechnology program. And we
recruited Gene Sander then for biochemistry and
some new hires there. We made the decision that we
would not create a central biotechnology center
like a lot of universities